[BIRDS CHIRPING]
[CLOCK SOFTLY TICKING]
[CLICK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[SNAP]
>> I see the completed image
when I'm looking at a blank
canvas.
It's just a matter of taking
the time to put the brush to it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Take picture.
>> Well, I like the
angle of the buildings.
I just love this whole area.
Small town America.
Plus, I like this
old gas station.
I think it'll be a nice
interest piece in the painting.
>> Take picture.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Take Picture
>> OK.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I grew up in this area.
This is one of the oldest
towns in the state.
There's just a lot
of good structures
here that I think will
bring a lot of interest
to the painting.
>> Take picture.
>> It's going to be a
patriotic-themed painting
called "Home of the Brave".
I wanted to do a tribute
to military and people
that have served this
country, and give it
an Americana-type theme.
I think it's important to
honor men and women that
serve us and put their lives on
the line day in, and day out.
>> Take picture.
>> Whether it's in the military,
or police, or fire department--
>> Take picture.
>> I'll probably be putting
an American Legion in it.
>> Take picture.
>> Corvettes, Ford pickup, a lot
of things that people grew up
with--
[BELL RINGING]
--total America theme to it.
[WIND BLOWING]
[CROW CAWING]
>> Jim is a Marvel.
It boggles the mind, what
he does, how he does it,
and where his
inspiration comes from.
The most incredible
thing about him
is the work he produces is
such a miracle because he's
legally blind.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It's utterly amazing what he
produces without that gift
that we all take for granted.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[STROKING CANVAS]
With vision, seeing
is believing.
But with faith,
believing is seeing.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When I was young,
around 12, 13 years old,
I had just gotten a
new pair of glasses.
And about a month later, I
couldn't read the blackboard.
I was diagnosed with a form
of macular degeneration.
What I have is
called Stargardt's.
It affects your retina,
where cells slowly die off,
normally, in the
center of your retina.
And they work their way
outward in the form of a star.
That's why it's
called Stargardt's.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[RAIN POURING]
[WIND BLOWING]
>> Just want to check out
the stars and stripes,
make sure everything's
looking good here.
One of the most important
elements to my painting,
I think.
>> Take picture.
>> Because of technology,
I can use a smartphone,
which tells me when my
photos are in focus.
And I can put my painting
under a magnifier, which
allows me to do my detail work.
[CLOCK TICKING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
One of the reasons for
a "Home of the Brave"
was to inspire and show
people what a great country
we live in, and that things
shouldn't be taken for granted.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[CLOCK TICKING]
Took this picture,
and then I had
it blown up so I could make
out more of the details on it.
This is the old gas
station down in Carver
that I'm going to
start working on.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Because I'm only working in a
few square inches at a time,
it just tends to get
very time-consuming.
Just starting to
put in the details
here for the American
Legion, which I think
is one of the more primary
elements to the painting.
The details has been
what I'm known for,
but at the same
time, it has been
something that kind of
drives me insane at times.
[TRICKLING]
>> Well, how are
your eyes today?
I know they were
tired yesterday.
>> Yeah, it got
to be a long day.
I was using that
magnifier quite a bit.
So it's kind of taking
its strain on my eyes.
And I've got an
appointment at the Mayo
coming up in a month
with the eye doctor
again, just for a checkup.
>> That's good.
>> Yeah, I'll see
what he has to say.
My vision, over the
years, it's gotten worse.
>> We are best friends.
It's always scary going to
the eye doctor with Jim,
because you never know
what they're going to say.
>> Someday, I may
not see at all.
[WATER TRICKLING]
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
God has a lot for me.
I don't know what
it is, but I think
he wouldn't have given
me this talent if I
wasn't to put it to good use.
>> Luckily, we're both positive
and we try not to worry.
And so we just talk
about what we can do,
and then we say specific
prayers together.
Prayer gives Jim and I peace
of mind, no need to worry.
>> Dear God, thank you for
guiding me and helping me
to complete this painting.
>> We know that we'll get
through everything together.
Amen.
>> Amen.
[METAL GRATING]
>> One of the most remarkable
things, Jim, about you,
is that when I look at your
retinas, as a retina doctor--
good, look up, please.
I often scratch my head and
try to understand more about
how it is that you do the
wonderful work that you do.
Because I understand,
on several levels,
just what you're dealing with
in terms of your vision loss.
Yet, you've been able
to do remarkable things
beyond what most
artists can do, even
when they're fully-sighted.
I think that's one of the
really most striking and most
inspirational features
about knowing you,
and about being able
to take care of you,
is that you really pushed
the envelope beyond what
I think most people can do.
And I think if we
could just understand
it a little bit better, and
bottle that up, and give
that to some of
my other patients,
I think we'll be able
to help a lot of people.
And I think you really serve
as an inspiration on how
you can work through loss.
And the role of
resilience in that,
meaning, basically, if you're
down, you pick yourself up.
And you push yourself forward.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Certainly, here at
Mayo, we have experts
in resilience and
mindfulness that
are helping us learn how
to pursue our specialties,
and to develop our resilience
and our mindfulness.
And so I think this is
a very important topic.
It's something that is
actually quite ancient,
and that we're just tapping back
into an understanding of what
this means, for how to
be successful in the face
of adversity.
I think you really are
an inspiration to us all,
and to many of my
own patients, who
are struggling with
similar problems
to what you've had to
deal with for your life.
It's my honor to be your doctor.
>> Well, thanks.
>> Perseverance is just moving
forward even when it gets
tough.
Jim does not give up.
He keeps going.
And I think a lot of that
is for me and our kids.
And he wants to
model perseverance.
>> There was a time
I was at an art show,
one of my early shows.
And I remember hearing somebody
behind me looking at my work
and said, that's pretty
good for a blind guy.
And it always stuck with me.
And I thought, well, that's not
what I want to be known for.
I want to be known
as a good artist.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Even when I was
younger, I always
felt no matter what the
boundary is, or the limitation,
you could still move through
that and beyond that.
Even in high school, I couldn't
play basketball anymore
because I had trouble
seeing the ball.
So I joined track and
became a great runner.
And I still run to this day.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Whatever it is, just don't stop.
Keep working your
way through it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
A lot of it, I think,
is attitude and mindset.
>> It's been tough.
It's hard for him to
keep going, sometimes.
And other people, I
think, would give up.
And he never gives up.
And his attitude is amazing.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> To make this
painting complete,
there's nothing more Americana
for "Home of the Brave"
than a flag coming off the
front porch of your house.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I can never see
the whole picture.
It's usually just bits
and pieces at a time.
And so when I sit back,
even 2, 3 feet away from it,
I couldn't tell you what the
entire painting looks like.
So I do cheat a little bit.
>> Take picture.
Button.
>> I'll take a picture
of it on my phone.
And I can throw that
under my magnifier.
And then I see the painting.
Even though my vision
is getting worse,
I think that because of
technology, my artwork
is getting better.
[CLICK]
>> With every piece Jim
paints, I go in the studio.
And then I look at the
painting as if I'm the camera.
>> Hopefully, you
won't find anything.
>> I hope not.
>> So I'll scan the piece.
And I'll just see
wherever my eye stops.
He hopes I'm going to
go up in the studio
and just say, it looks
great, hon, you know?
Stay here, right
where my finger is.
Right there.
>> I do know whenever I
have her come up there,
I do bite my tongue because I
know there's going to be some
more work for me out of it.
Because there is
usually something
that needs correcting.
[CHUCKLES]
>> Everything looks great.
>> I took the spot
out of the sky.
>> It's beautiful.
>> Thank you.
>> I love it.
>> When I painted
the flag in the sky,
I wanted it to represent the
blanket of freedom that we all
live under.
>> I feel inspired
when I look at it.
When I look at how he did
the sky, it blows me away.
>> "Home of the Brave"
is so heart-evoking,
it reminds me of a time gone by
that I wish were still around,
frankly.
But he's captured a moment.
>> "Home of the Brave"
is Americana at its best.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When I work on a painting,
I do try to give the viewer
the idea that they can just
step right into it and be a part
of it.
[FIRE CRACKLING]
>> Despite my dad
being legally blind,
he sees more in everything.
>> Dad is my inspiration.
He is my personal hero.
He's able to do all
this super talented art
while being legally blind.
He's basically a
superhero, just needs
the cape with the paintbrush.
>> Well, I do feel blessed.
>> He makes it look so easy.
People fall in love with him
for being such an inspiration
and such a great guy.
>> He wants to paint
for as long as he can.
>> Vision came from within.
And it was just a matter of
bringing it into reality inch
by inch on a blank canvas.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I see the completed image when
I'm looking at a blank canvas.
It's just a matter of taking
the time to put the brush to it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]